+files metadata (#11284)
nextcloud/documentation: developer_manual/digging_deeper/files-metadata.rst

==============
Files Metadata
==============

.. versionadded:: 28

Nextcloud includes an API to manage files' metadata, with a deep integration in Webdav.

Concept overview
----------------

> When a file is created or modified on Nextcloud, a refresh of its metadata is initiated:
>  * get current metadata from database or create a new ``IFilesMetadata`` if not available,
>  * dispatch a ``MetadataLiveEvent`` to be caught by apps to complete with custom metadata,
>  * save custom metadata in database if content have been modified during the event,
>  * refresh indexes if needed,
>  * if an app requested it, prep a new cronjob to dispatch a ``MetadataBackgroundEvent``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a file is created or modified on Nextcloud, a refresh of its metadata is initiated. You will then be able to listen to the `MetadataLiveEvent` event to create, update, or delete metadata. If you suspect your process to be hungry in time or resources, you can request for a background event called `MetadataBackgroundEvent` and do your work there.
```

-------------------------------

Using Webdav request, a client can create or update metadata about a file:

.. code-block:: console

    curl 'https://cloud.example.net/remote.php/dav/files/test/document.txt' \
        --user test:test \
        --request PROPPATCH \
        --data '<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
            <d:propertyupdate xmlns:d="DAV:" xmlns:oc="http://owncloud.org/ns" xmlns:nc="http://nextcloud.org/ns">
                <d:set>
                    <d:prop>
                        <nc:metadata-myapp-test>123</nc:metadata-myapp-test>
                    </d:prop>
                </d:set>
            </d:propertyupdate>'

This will return a result like

.. code-block:: xml

    <?xml version="1.0"?>
    <d:multistatus xmlns:d="DAV:" xmlns:oc="http://owncloud.org/ns" xmlns:nc="http://nextcloud.org/ns">
        <d:response>
            <d:href>/remote.php/dav/files/test/document.txt</d:href>
            <d:propstat>
                <d:prop>
                    <nc:metadata-myapp-test/>
                </d:prop>
                <d:status>HTTP/1.1 200 OK</d:status>
            </d:propstat>
        </d:response>
    </d:multistatus>

> 

Reviewer: Note: When getting or updating a metadata through WebDAV, metadata are prefixed by `metadata-`. Which means that, in this case, the metadata name is `myapp-test`.

.. note::
    Do not work on readonly documents. Account needs update permissions on the file.

.. note::
    If metadata was not known before, or initiated using ``IFilesMetadataManager::initMetadata()``, the generated value will be typed as string and not indexed.

.. warning::

>     TODO: files_metadata_fulleditmode / initMetadata() ?

Reviewer: To update after https://github.com/nextcloud/server/pull/41390 is merged

                    <nc:metadata-myapp-test/>
                </d:prop>
                <d:status>HTTP/1.1 404 Not Found</d:status>
            </d:propstat>
        </d:response>
        <d:response>
            <d:href>/remote.php/dav/files/test/document.txt</d:href>
            <d:propstat>
                <d:prop>
                    <nc:metadata-myapp-test>123</nc:metadata-myapp-test>
                </d:prop>
                <d:status>HTTP/1.1 200 OK</d:status>
            </d:propstat>
        </d:response>
        <d:response>
            <d:href>/remote.php/dav/files/test/another-one.txt</d:href>
            <d:propstat>
                <d:prop>
                    <nc:metadata-myapp-test>369</nc:metadata-myapp-test>
                </d:prop>
                <d:status>HTTP/1.1 200 OK</d:status>
            </d:propstat>
        </d:response>
    </d:multistatus>

.. warning::
    Metadata used in ORDER and WHERE statement will require metadata to be initiated and set as indexed.
    It is advised to call ``IFilesMetadataManager::initMetadata()`` before running the webdav request or it will returns an exception because of unknown property.

.. code-block:: php

> 

Reviewer: // Application.php

    public function boot(IBootContext $context): void {
        /** @var IFilesMetadataManager $metadataManager */
        $metadataManager = $context->getServerContainer()->get(IFilesMetadataManager::class);
        $metadataManager->initMetadata('my-second-meta', IMetadataValueWrapper::TYPE_INT, true);
    }

Metadata Query Helper
---------------------

``IFilesMetadataManager::getMetadataQuery(IQueryBuilder $qb, string $fileTableAlias, string $fileIdField)`` returns a ``IMetadataQuery`` to help building Sql request with the following methods.
Parameters when calling the method are the alias of the table, and the name of the field, that contains file ids.

 * ``retrieveMetadata()`` will add a select on the stored metadata
 * ``extractMetadata(array $row)`` convert a fetched row from the resultinto a ``IFilesMetadata``
 * ``joinIndex(string $metadataKey, bool $enforce)`` join the indexes to the request
 * ``enforceMetadataKey(string $metadataKey)`` enforce the need for a metadata key to be set
 * ``getMetadataKeyField(string $metadataKey)`` returns the field and the aliased table of the key of an index

>  * ``getMetadataValueField(string $metadataKey)`` returns the field and the aliased table of the value of an index

Reviewer: Maybe add an example
